Academia.edu no longer supports Internet Explorer. To browse Academia.edu and the wider internet faster and more securely, please take a few seconds to upgrade your browser. Enter the email address you signed up with and we'll email you a reset link. Download Free PDF AI This paper provides a critical review of Kotter's eight-step change model, which is a prominent approach in change management. It examines the complexities and challenges organizations face during transformations, emphasizing that skipping any step in Kotter's model can jeopardize the entire change process. Key issues highlighted include the model's top-down nature, lack of employee participation, and its rigid structure that complicates adapting to changes once initiated. Strategic Change, 2002 Organization Development Journal, 2005 The article examines three basic approaches to organizational change-directed change, planned change, and guided changing-and their appropriateness as a function of the relative business complexity and socio-technical uncertainty in the situation. Two ... Revista de Științe Politice/ Revue des Sciences Politiques, 2018 The study of change is a major concern at present in all fields of science. Traditionally, in philosophy and socio-human sciences, the concept of change was approached as opposed to that of stability, with intense debates about the desirability and importance of order and stability vs. the unpredictability of change. While in classical approaches to organizational change the conceptions that favoured order, stability, and routine prevailed, modern approaches recognize the decisive role of accepting change for the development and progress of organizations. In the field of organization development and organizational becoming nowadays strategies are sought and devised in order to align the organizations not only with their rapid inner changing, but also with the external multiple, complex, and dynamic environments. Starting from an outline of the factors of change and of the term of change as it has been conceptualized in sociology, the present paper aims to delineate a general framework for addressing organizational change. In this regard, after discussing the relationship between organizational change and the social and economic environment and delineating the main areas and agents of change in an organization, the various types of change in the organization and the models of their approach are addressed. Furthermore, since the resistance to change is a common and omnipresent human and social phenomenon, including at the level of groups and organizations, the paper approaches also the causes and manifestations of change resistance, as well as the possible measures for combating this phenomenon, in situations where the change is beneficial and necessary. Journal of Organizational Change Management, 2013 Purpose-Organizational change is a risky endeavour. Most change initiatives fall short on their goals and produce high opportunity and process costs, which at times outweigh the content benefits of organizational change. This paper seeks to develop a framework, offering a theoretical toolbox to analyze context-dependent barriers and enablers of organizational change. Starting from an organizational identity perspective, it aims to link contingency-based approaches, such as environmental scan, SWOT and stakeholder analysis, with insights from organizational behaviour research, such as knowledge sharing and leadership. Design/methodology/approach-The framework is informed by long-lasting field research into organizational change in an international policing environment. The theories in the framework are selected from the perspective of field validity in two ways; they were chosen because the topics covered by these theories emerged as relevant during the field research and therefore it can be expected they have applicability to the field. The authors' insights and suggestions are summarised in 13 propositions throughout the text. Findings-The analysis provides a clear warning that organizational change is more risky and multifaceted than change initiators typically assume. It is stressed that the external environment and the internal dynamics of organizations co-determine the meaning of managerial practices. This implies that cure-all recipes to organizational change are bound to fail. Originality/value-This paper makes an ambitious attempt to cross disciplinary boundaries in the field of organizational change research to contribute to a more comprehensive and holistic understanding of change processes by integrating perspectives that focus on the internal context and the external environment of organizations. With change an ever-present factor of life, one would expect great agreement on what the essential elements are for a successful change effort or a response to a changed situation. However, that is not the case and it is generally recognized that most change programs fail for a number of reasons that are only identified in hindsight. Many of these failures can be traced to attempts at replicating prior change efforts that were successful. This is based upon the assumption that a best practice for change can be identified through the processes that were used in the earlier attempt. However, this fails to recognize the myriad of factors that might be different, any one of which might invalidate a critical component of success in the earlier success. The attempt here is to focus on the core components of change with the realization that there is no simple answer that can be applied in all cases. The literature on change is characterized by an opposite, dichotomist view on the subject. Many authors describe only one or some of these characteristics and attribute a normative value to it. When discussing one of these attributes they will make a deviating classification in the way in which change arises. Although types and attributes of change are largely studied in the change literature, there is no general agreement on the attributes that can best describe the different types of change. The purpose of this chapter is to try to consolidate the vast literature on the types and attributes of change in order to find a more homogeneous set of attributes. From an extensive literature research on change articles and books from 1970 onward, eight dimensions of change attributes were found that are able to describe the characteristics of a change in a dynamic way. In order to overcome the dichotomist view, organizational change is approached not as a process changing a system but as a system by itself. Although the borders between the change system and the system to be changed are not always easy to perceive, this view seems to create a richer picture on change. A systems approach allows to define the attributes of change in a holistic way that captures the always paradoxical state change is in. INTRODUCTION The literature on organizational change is characterized by a dichotomist view, always separating the subject into two classifications. This dichotomic approach has resulted in a cluttered jumble of change models that do not tend to promote the general understanding of this subject matter. A systems approach can provide a way to describe change based on all the attributes of the change system. If organizational change is considered a system in itself, that system will show dynamic fluctuations during the change process that can be described based on the attributes of that system. From an extensive literature research of change articles and books from 1970 onward, eight attributes of change were found. Using these attributes an organizational change system can be defined in all its aspects. This approach is also much better able to view change as a process of becoming than the static definitions resulting from the dichotomic approach. In the first section of this chapter we investigate the way that changes are being described in the literature on change as well as the resulting conclusions that can be drawn. Next, the characteristics of changes will be grouped in a dynamic entity, which will allow describing all attributes of a change. Finally, we study an alternative way that systems theory can be applied to change management. International Journal of Academic Research in Accounting, Finance and Management Sciences This study was conducted to determine the most studied topics which studied in organizational change management and pave the way the future research in organizational change. For this purpose, first of all, concept of organizational change is explained by theoretical view. Then, the studies which were conducted before 2000 and after 2000 to today were examined in dimension of content, context, process and outcome. As a result, Theories of change, leadership and change, organizational change in multinational company, organizational culture and change, employees' behaviour, information technology and organizational development strategies are the most studied topics of organizational change literature. Also we stressed that leadership and technological change are the most studied topics especially after 2000, and non-linear changing approaches because of the fact that uncertainty and chaos in nowadays. 2016 This paper presents a literature review on change management. Change management has been defined as ‘the process of continually renewing an organisation’s direction, structure, and capabilities to serve the ever-changing needs of external and internal customers (Moran & Brightman 2000). Kanter (1992) contends that we live in a constantly changing world, and change has an impact on the individuals and the organisation as a whole. In this context, organisations have to look into the future to find new advantages. New technologies, new products, new competitors, new regulations, and new people with new values and experience is the order of the modern organisation. Nevertheless, theories and approaches to change management are often conflicting, lacking in empirical evidence and based on unchallenged assumptions about the nature of modern organisational change management. This paper looks at some of the main theories and approaches to organisational change management as an important fir... International Journal of Educational Leadership and Management, 2017 Organizational change is probably the singular most important undertaken that many organizations wish they could do to affect their productivities/profitability performances. This review paper will highlight some of the well-known theories and approaches to organizational change. In the late 1990s and early 2000s, America had one of the best economies in decades and many of her citizens were able to benefit from it both financially and educationally; the economy (and educational aspirations) grew expeditiously and lifted millions of Americans out of poverty. These economical and educational turnarounds were achieved due in part to innovative and transformational leaders who understand that in order for businesses to grow, organizational change has to be an integral part of the process. However, the issue now is that there seems to be too many complex and confusing change theories that profess to have the remedies for 'fixing' the organizational problems. Ideally, however, this review paper will try to highlight the essentials of the selected organizational change and leadership theories and simplify them by making them accessible and understandable. Additionally, this review will try to ease some of the confusions of the theories and potentially help guide the change agents to the appropriate organizational change theories. The underlying assumption of the classical, linear approach to organizational change is that it involves a series of predictable, reducible steps that enable senior management to establish a new work order and routines. This article confronts the conventional assumption that change is a finite, one-off phenomenon, representing the exception rather than the rule. Beginning with the rational change model as an exemplar, and subsequently by examining 10 organizational change philosophies, this article reviews the fundamental assumptions governing different change management approaches. In revealing the biases and uni-dimensional nature of theoretical philosophies of organizational change, this article argues for a multi-philosophy approach that applies an interactive mix of continuity and change. Managing the continuity-change continuum helps to guard against complacency and inertia, and underpins an organization's capacity both to exploit and explore. ASHE-ERIC Higher Education Report, 2001 Every organisms and non-organisms are evolving and improving to become better. Hence, they make changes. In order to catch up with the trend of marketplace, organizations have to take the initiative to change. Organizational change is important to lead the organizations to success. This article is going to talk about the perspectives, theories, models and approaches of organizational change. Different type of changes that should be known during the process of organizational such as technology change, structural change, task change and people change will be discussed as well. Some examples are provided. Then, we will explore the factors such as leadership, resistance to change and commitment to change that lead to the success and failure of organization change. The Tqm Magazine, 2002 The term `transformation' is much used in the practice and literature of management and organizations. We are curious as to why there has been little challenge to or questioning of usage of the term. In this paper we identify a number of dimensions on which usage of `transformation' appears to vary. This results in a tentative classification into a matrix of four types. These are: a) Change of form or enterprise b) Corporate Transformation (planned, system-wide change) c) Learning Organisation initiatives (transforming mind sets and `paradigms') d) `Organizational Transformation' (OT) based on acts of faith and personal commitment, often involving notions of spirituality. AMCIS 2000 Proceedings, 2000 To currently view where we are in relation to managing change in organizations we should first revisit the origins of organizational change. Lewin (1958) developed the 3 step model of unfreezing, moving and refreezing. Burnes (1992) collated the development of various ... Recent analyses of organizational change suggest a growing concern with the tempo of change, understood as the characteristic rate, rhythm, or pattern of work or activity. Episodic change is contrasted with continuous change on the basis of implied metaphors of organizing, analytic frameworks, ideal organizations, intervention theories, and roles for change agents. Episodic change follows the sequence unfreeze-transition-refreeze, whereas continuous change follows the sequence freeze-rebalance-unfreeze. Conceptualizations of inertia are seen to underlie the choice to view change as episodic or continuous. Journal of Organizational Change Management, 1996 2017 Organizational change is a fact of life; it involves changes of organizations’ mission, vision and/or processes, with impact at both individual and organization level. Some organizations accept changes if they consider them as necessary and quickly adapt their behaviour in a desire new direction but in most cases changes are considered unnecessary or very difficult and organizations do not adapt to the new context defined by the turbulent environment in which they operates. Considering these, the goal of the present research is to provide an overview on organizational change processes by considering the operation level and different approaches described in the literature. In the first part of the article there will be described how organizations operate and are interconnected based on Morgan&#39;s organizational metaphors. This will clarify aspects related to organizations’ behaviour and will point out the advantages and limitations of different actions’ options. In the second part ... 2010 2022 There is little argument that organizational change is increasingly important. Turbulent organizational environments, hypercompetition, and related organizational activities demand that organizations manage change effectively (e.g., Ilinitch, D&#39;Aveni, and Lewin, 1996). Organizations must perceive and respond to changes in their environments, independently create new environments, and learn from their experiences. This volume of the JAI series, Research in Organizational Change and Development, takes on these issues in a variety of ways. 2005 Abstract Scholars hold different views about whether organizations consist of things or processes and about variance or process methods for conducting research. By combining these two dimensions, we develop a typology of four approaches for studying organizational change. Although the four approaches may be viewed as opposing or competing views, we see them as being complementary. Each approach focuses on different questions and provides a different—but partial—understanding of organizational change. Loading Preview Sorry, preview is currently unavailable. You can download the paper by clicking the button above.