7 fundamental change management models Reading time: about 6 min Topics: Digital transformation Change management models Lewin's change management model: A three-step approach to behavior change that reflects the process of melting and reshaping an ice cube. ADKAR model: A people-centered approach to facilitate change at the individual level. Kotter's eight-step change model: A process that focuses on trust, transparency, and teamwork to reduce resistance to change. Kübler-Ross Change Curve®: A framework that breaks down how people process change using the “5 Stages of Grief®.” McKinsey 7-S model: A process centered around the alignment of seven fundamental elements of any organization. PDCA: A cyclical and iterative change management process focused on continuous improvement. Bridges Transition Model: A people-centered model focused on managing the experience of transitioning to change. While definitions vary, change management generally refers to how teams and companies implement organizational change. Often referred to as the only constant, change—and the management of it—is ever-evolving and affects everyone. And although there is no one right way to mitigate change, organizations return to a few tried-and-true change management models again and again. Lewin’s change management model Developed in the 1940s, Lewin's change management model remains relevant because of its simple yet effective structure. According to the model's namesake, Kurt Lewin, organizational change management can be broken down into three smaller, more manageable stages: Unfreeze Change Refreeze A physicist by trade, Lewin used the example of turning a cube of ice into a cone of ice and applied it to organizational change management. First, a team or organization must “unfreeze” their current process and perceptions when preparing for upcoming changes. This step helps the team approach the task or challenge with a clean slate, free of bias or bad habits. Next, it’s time to implement changes. Making effective change requires clear and constant communication both during and after deployment. Finally, it’s time to “refreeze.” Assuming accurate feedback and ongoing communication occurred during the “change” step, the “refreeze” step locks into place the new process. Like ice molds, teams and organizations need to move away from an old mold before they can fit into a new one. The Lewin change model, while seen as too simplistic for some, is favored by others for its ability to uncover old patterns and overlooked problems as well as for its approach to new ways of thinking. ADKAR model The ADKAR model is popular for its people-focused approach to change management. Created by Jeffrey Hiatt, the ADKAR change model facilitates change on an individual level since change is often less about the changes themselves and more about people’s reactions to them. ADKAR is an acronym for: Awareness: Awareness of the need to change Desire: Desire to participate in and support the change Knowledge: Knowledge of how to change Ability: Ability to implement the change Reinforcement: Reinforcement to sustain the change Since organizational change is directly dependent upon its employees for successful implementation, it’s critical for individuals to have a clear understanding of what changes are occurring, why they are occurring, and how they affect them personally. The ADKAR model helps individuals process change through clearly defined stages that enable them to both understand and accept the changes at hand. Start using the ADKAR model for change management. Kotter’s eight-step change model Developed by John Kotter after a survey of more than 100 organizations in flux, the Kotter eight-step change model also focuses more on the people experiencing large organizational changes rather than the changes themselves. The eight steps are: Create a sense of urgency. Build a strong coalition. Form a strategic vision. Get everyone’s buy-in. Enable action by removing barriers. Generate short-term wins. Sustain acceleration. Institute change. Kotter’s change management process turns possibly resistant individuals into receptive participants through trust, transparency, and teamwork. Centered around the end goal, getting everyone’s involvement, and executing the impending changes together, this process remains a long-standing favorite among many organizations. Kübler-Ross Change Curve® Developed by Dr. Elisabeth Kübler-Ross and most widely known as the “5 Stages of Grief®,” the Kübler-Ross Change Curve® can also be thought of as a reliable change management framework due to its breakdown of how people process change in general. Organizations can better prepare for change when they also anticipate the possible reactions of their teams. The five stages are: Denial Anger Bargaining Depression Acceptance One caveat to consider with this change management model is that these stages are not always sequential and that everyone can progress through them differently. Because of that variation, this model can also be used to supplement other change management models for a two-fold approach. McKinsey 7-S model The McKinsey 7-S model was developed at the McKinsey consulting firm by Thomas J. Peters and Robert H. Waterman during the 1970s to evaluate how the different parts of an organization work together. According to the 7-S model, there are seven fundamental elements of every organization that fall under hard elements (easiest to identify and control), and soft elements (more subjective and difficult to change. Hard elements include: Strategy Structure System Soft elements include: Shared values Staff Style Skills As an example, if a company grows rapidly from 15 employees to 50 employees, the staff, shared values, and structure of the organization will probably change and are going to affect the other elements. Using the 7-S model, it is possible to understand the changes and realign the elements during growth to keep everything running smoothly. PDCA model Also known as the Deming Wheel or the control cycle, the PDCA model was developed by William Deming during the 1950s. Standing for plan, do, check, and act, the PDCA model is a cyclical and iterative process for continuous change and improvement. It helps organizations make improvements by following a simple process: devise a plan, test the plan, implement the plan, evaluate the plan's success, and make the necessary changes. Rinse and repeat. PDCA is best used when conducting controlled trials, finding inefficiencies, and developing new processes across businesses and industries. Find out how to apply the PDCA model to improve your business. Bridges Transition Model Similar to the Kübler-Ross Change Curve®, the Bridges Transition Model is another people-centered approach to change management. According to the Bridges Transition Model, the key to change management isn't the results of the change, but the way the employees let go of the old and accept the new. The model is best used during large changes to help employees through the process. There are three stages that occur when people transition to change: Ending, losing, and letting go: As contradictory as it seems, the first step in the transition model begins with an end and is typically the most emotional for employees. Failure to acknowledge employees' feelings may cause them to reject the changes, so it is important to clearly communicate the purpose and benefits of the change. Neutral zone: During this phase, employees adapt to the change and get up to speed with new processes. Communicate quickly and clearly when issues arise to avoid confusion and frustration. New beginnings: The last stage of the transition is acceptance. Employees have a sense of direction and understand why the changes needed to happen. Highlight the success of the changes to demonstrate the tangible results of the employees' hard work. Prepare for change Change management models help organizations prepare for upcoming changes. Whether you are working on large, company-wide changes or updating processes within your department, the right resources make planning for even the broadest of changes within an organization possible. No matter which change management model you choose, Lucid’s change management experts offer five tips that will help you successfully lead your organization through transformation. About Lucid Lucid Software is the leader in visual collaboration and work acceleration, helping teams see and build the future by turning ideas into reality. Its products include the Lucid Visual Collaboration Suite (Lucidchart and Lucidspark) and airfocus. The Lucid Visual Collaboration Suite, combined with powerful accelerators for business agility, cloud, and process transformation, empowers organizations to streamline work, foster alignment, and drive business transformation at scale. airfocus, an AI-powered product management and roadmapping platform, extends these capabilities by helping teams prioritize work, define product strategy, and align execution with business goals. The most used work acceleration platform by the Fortune 500, Lucid's solutions are trusted by more than 100 million users across enterprises worldwide, including Google, GE, and NBC Universal. Lucid partners with leaders such as Google, Atlassian, and Microsoft, and has received numerous awards for its products, growth, and workplace culture. Related articles 3 steps to aligning executives for effective change managementLearn how to conquer change management by establishing executive alignment first in this guest blog post by ExperiencePoint. 3 steps to aligning executives for effective change management Learn how to conquer change management by establishing executive alignment first in this guest blog post by ExperiencePoint. 3 Agile change management tips: Leading through transformationIn this blog post, we share three change management tips that leaders can champion for successful agile transformation. 3 Agile change management tips: Leading through transformation In this blog post, we share three change management tips that leaders can champion for successful agile transformation. 3 ways leaders can use visuals as a catalyst for changeAgile leadership expert Pete Behrens shares insights on how leaders can use visuals to effectively lead their organizations through change. 3 ways leaders can use visuals as a catalyst for change Agile leadership expert Pete Behrens shares insights on how leaders can use visuals to effectively lead their organizations through change. A guide to achieving organizational alignmentRecognizing the importance of organizational alignment is easy—achieving it isn't. Explore our best tips to start. A guide to achieving organizational alignment Recognizing the importance of organizational alignment is easy—achieving it isn't. Explore our best tips to start. Bring your bright ideas to life. By registering, you agree to our Terms of Service and you acknowledge that you have read and understand our Privacy Policy.