All material on this site has been provided by the respective publishers and authors. You can help correct errors and omissions. When requesting a correction, please mention this item's handle: RePEc:spr:innchp:978-3-030-15409-7_24. See general information about how to correct material in RePEc. If you have authored this item and are not yet registered with RePEc, we encourage you to do it here. This allows to link your profile to this item. It also allows you to accept potential citations to this item that we are uncertain about. We have no bibliographic references for this item. You can help adding them by using this form . If you know of missing items citing this one, you can help us creating those links by adding the relevant references in the same way as above, for each refering item. If you are a registered author of this item, you may also want to check the "citations" tab in your RePEc Author Service profile, as there may be some citations waiting for confirmation. For technical questions regarding this item, or to correct its authors, title, abstract, bibliographic or download information, contact: Sonal Shukla or Springer Nature Abstracting and Indexing (email available below). General contact details of provider: http://www.springer.com . Please note that corrections may take a couple of weeks to filter through the various RePEc services. Follow serials, authors, keywords & more Public profiles for Economics researchers Various research rankings in Economics Who was a student of whom, using RePEc Curated articles & papers on economics topics Upload your paper to be listed on RePEc and IDEAS Subscribe to new additions to RePEc Blog aggregator for economics research Cases of plagiarism in Economics Initiative for open bibliographies in Economics News about RePEc Questions about IDEAS and RePEc RePEc volunteers Publishers indexing in RePEc Found an error or omission? Opportunities to help RePEc Have your research listed on RePEc Have your institution's/publisher's output listed on RePEc Use data assembled by RePEc