6 Change Management Stages A Management Checklist to Guide Your Efforts in Managing Change · Share · Pin · Share · Email ••• BY SUSAN M. HEATHFIELD Updated January 17, 2020 Experience 6 Stages to Effectively Manage Change Change is a complex process. You must consider many issues when approaching an opportunity to change or bring about change. The need for change management skills is a constant in the quickly changing world of organizations. The following six-stage model of change will assist you to understand change and to make changes in your work unit, department, or company effectively. The model also helps you understand the role of the change agent, the person or group that is taking primary responsibility for the accomplishment of the desired changes. For change to occur, you do need leadership to communicate, provide training, and share constancy of purpose. An organization must complete each of the steps in the model for changes to effectively transpire. However, completion of the steps may occur in a somewhat different order than appears here. In some situations, the boundaries between the stages are unclear. What Affects Change Management? Organizational characteristics such as the level of employee involvement and empowerment affect how changes proceed. Units that desire and/or have experience with a greater degree of people involvement can bring people willingly into the change process at an earlier stage. Characteristics of the changes such as size and scope, also affect the change process. Large changes require more planning. Changes that involve a total organization will require more planning and the involvement of more people than making changes in a single department. Changes that have widespread support as well as those that employees view as a gain rather than as a loss are easier to implement. When you take the right steps, involve the appropriate people, and tend to the potential impacts of change, resistance to change is reduced. These change management steps will help your organization make necessary and desired changes. This favorite quote about change from the book, "Flight of the Buffalo" is particularly apt. "Change is hard because people overestimate the value of what they have—and underestimate the value of what they may gain by giving it up." -- Belasco & Stayer Make sense? Fit your experience? Now, on with the change management stages. Change Management Stages These change management stages will assist you to approach change in your organization in a systematic manner that will help you effectively implement the change. Stage 1: Initiation In this stage, one or more people in the organization realize the need for change. There is a nagging feeling that something is not right. This awareness can come from many sources, both inside and outside of the organization. It can also occur at any level in the organization. The people who are most familiar with the work often have the most accurate perceptions abou ...Read less