JavaScript seems to be disabled in your browser. For the best experience on our site, be sure to turn on Javascript in your browser. Hello! You are viewing this site in English language. Is this correct? ADKAR sits at the center of the Prosci Methodology graphic to emphasize that organizational change requires individual change. The Prosci ADKAR® Model is one of the two foundational models of the Prosci Methodology, in addition to the PCT Model. The word “ADKAR” is an acronym for the five outcomes an individual needs to achieve for a change to be successful: Awareness, Desire, Knowledge, Ability and Reinforcement. The model was developed nearly two decades ago by Prosci founder Jeff Hiatt after studying the change patterns of more than 700 organizations. The ADKAR Model is used by thousands of change leaders around the world. This powerful model is based on the understanding that organizational change can only happen when individuals change. Whereas the Prosci 3-Phase Process is a framework for organizational change, the ADKAR Model focuses on individual change—guiding individuals through a particular change and addressing any roadblocks or barrier points along the way. Organizational changes often fail because employees don’t understand the importance of getting on board the change or how to successfully make the change. They simply understand that a change is happening. And leaders are often not equipped to engage individuals effectively during the change and to manage any potential resistance. The ADKAR Model addresses these challenges by equipping leaders with the right strategies and tools, and individuals with the right information, motivation and ability to successfully move through changes in the organization. By outlining the goals and outcomes of successful change, the ADKAR Model enables leaders and change management teams to focus their activities on what will drive individual change and therefore achieve organizational results. Discover the power of the Prosci ADKAR Model with our free eBooks. Awareness – Of the need for change Desire – To Participate and support the change Knowledge – On how to change Ability – To implement required skills and behaviors Reinforcement – To sustain the change Activities for moving individuals through ADKAR transitions happen during Phase 2 – Manage Change of the Prosci 3-Phase Process, and are scalable to fit your needs. You apply the ADKAR Model using Proxima, an innovative online tool you access via the Prosci Hub Solution Suite in the Prosci Portal. In Proxima, you use tools such as the ADKAR Blueprint—the backbone of Prosci change management—to identify milestones, target dates and anticipated gaps. You also use the ADKAR Blueprint to help in developing your change management plans, such as the Sponsor Plan and People Manager Plan. The ADKAR Assessment helps to identify any barrier points to change for individual roles so you can support these individuals in progressing through the change. ADKAR status checks along the way are key to project success. Practitioners use both the Prosci ADKAR Model and the Prosci 3-Phase Process to achieve sustainable change. Step into the transformative world of change with The ADKAR Advantage. This new book casts a spotlight on the ADKAR Models powerful simplicity, offering rich guidance and practical resources for facilitating change. With ADKAR as your new lens, you can achieve the outcomes you seek from change and sustain them over time. The book provides a thorough exploration of the model, shares first-hand ADKAR stories, and provides helpful resources grounded in Prosci’s benchmarking research. Use this book to: – Jean-Claude Monney, Microsoft To help guide you on your change journey. ADKAR in the Blog ADKAR Success Stories ADKAR Webinars Downloadable Resources Addressing the challenges of change is much simpler with a structured framework. Learn how to successfully apply all elements of the ADKAR Model. Stay up-to-date on our latest blogs, upcoming webinars and cutting-edge research.