Academia.edu no longer supports Internet Explorer. To browse Academia.edu and the wider internet faster and more securely, please take a few seconds to upgrade your browser. Enter the email address you signed up with and we'll email you a reset link. Download Free PDF 2020, Home … 19 pages 1 file Change management theorists have come up with different suggestions and models on how leaders can effect change in their organizations in an effective and efficient way. The different change management theories are based on the theorists’ view of the behaviors and the attitudes of people in the environment. However, the modern technological and digital world seem to have necessitated development of new leadership and change management models away from the past change management techniques. The foundational change management models should be evaluated for their fitness in the new global business and digital world. One of the most developed older change management model is Kurt Lewin’s change model that have been in use in leadership for a long time. Review of literature affirms the difference in the application of the theory in the past business organizations and in today’s dynamic, digitalized, and de-humanized world. It can be to persuade that the prosperous of change management is crucial to any organization or firm in order to survive and succeed in the present highly competitive and continuously to draw out business environment. However, theories and approaches to change management currently available to academics and practitioners are often contradictory, mostly lacking empirical evidence and supported by unchallenged hypotheses concerning the nature of contemporary organizational change management. The purpose of this article is, therefore, to provide a critical review of some of the main theories and approaches to organizational change management as an important first step towards constructing a new framework for managing change. South Asian research journal of humanities and social sciences, 2023 This paper theoretically evaluated leadership and management of change in organizations, realizing that change management is a continuous method used in transitioning social, organizational, and psychological change of employees. The review focused on the change management processes that address leaders' and employees' attitudes and how change management is created, as a catalyst for possible changes in an organization. The purpose of change management is ultimately to make use of initiatives and ensure that every employee in an organization is willing and ready to switch over to an anticipated new role in the organization. This current study evaluated the relationship between evaluated management of change in organizational leadership, change, and organization, management of change, the importance of change management, and principles of change management, other areas visited are types of organizational change, popular models for managing change, overcoming resistance to change, challenges of change management, how change management are created viz-à-viz ideas, thoughts, feelings, plans, habits, commitment, lifestyle, and change. The review concluded that consistently and effectively navigating change requires strong leadership because, in the end, it is the employees who will execute the new strategy in their day-today work lives. Leaders must be able to inspire people through a strong vision, define the strategy, communicate effectively, support their employees, and maintain the energy and commitment to change through to completion. The study recommends amongst others that organizational leaders should not undermine the power of ideas in their move toward change management, and should not underestimate thoughts, feelings, plans, and habits as an essential component of the change management process. HANGE management models and research are still relevant for the twenty-first century. The problems are not with their relevancy or their worth. The problems and challenges facing organizational leaders, organizational development experts and researchers relate to the speed and complexity of change required today. This article addresses selected change management models and research, their relevance in today's global economy and the challenges facing organizational leaders and researchers in terms of their application and expected results. We also suggest a relatively new strategic model as well as new applications of existing change management models and theories. delhibusinessreview.org HANGE management models and research are still relevant for the twenty-first century. The problems are not with their relevancy or their worth. The problems and challenges facing organizational leaders, organizational development experts and researchers relate to the speed and complexity of change required today. This article addresses selected change management models and research, their relevance in today's global economy and the challenges facing organizational leaders and researchers in terms of their application and expected results. We also suggest a relatively new strategic model as well as new applications of existing change management models and theories. The goal of the study was to thoroughly examine the organizational change management and leadership paradigms utilized in various industries. There are various leadership models that can be applied in various situations and change models that are used in various organizations, but there is no evidence of the effectiveness of these models when it comes to managing organizational change, and they aren&#39;t discussed as a group in a systematic way either. A research topic that has been highlighted by the studies is to present and examine the leadership models that are most frequently utilized in organizational change management. The past literature on empirical and theoretical topics is compiled via a systematic review. An analysis of the content that is qualitative and descriptive was planned. Scopus, Web of Science, Taylor & Francis, Google Scholar, Emerald, and PubMed search results were for research. The following leadership theories were examined: the Great-Man Theory, the Trait ...  The work of Kurt Lewin dominated the theory and practice of change management for over 40 years. However, in the past 20 years, Lewin's approach to change, particularly the 3-Step model, has attracted major criticisms. The key ones are that his work: assumed organizations operate in a stable state; was only suitable for small-scale change projects; ignored organizational power and politics; and was top-down and management-driven. This article seeks to re-appraise Lewin's work and challenge the validity of these views. It begins by describing Lewin's background and beliefs, especially his commitment to resolving social conflict. The article then moves on to examine the main elements of his Planned approach to change: Field Theory; Group Dynamics; Action Research; and the 3-Step model. This is followed by a brief summary of the major developments in the field of organizational change since Lewin's death which, in turn, leads to an examination of the main criticisms levelled at Lewin's work. The article concludes by arguing that rather than being outdated or redundant, Lewin's approach is still relevant to the modern world. This paper develops on the proposition that the management of change requires qualities of leadership. The discussion divides into two parts. The first section deliberates on the distinct concepts of management and leadership. Though Mike Pedler, et. al., (2004) in Gill, 2006, p. 39 say that there is no any one set of personal qualities that characterize leaders, I contend to have horizon scanning, defining the vision, and maintaining the momentum as the remarkable characteristics a leader possesses in managing change. It is the focus in the second section of this paper. The paper concludes with my personal viewpoints of what really it takes to be a leader and at the same time a manager. PEOPLE: International Journal of Social Sciences, 2018 In today VUCA (Volatile, Uncertain, Complex and Ambiguous) world, every organization or institution is susceptible to change wave. Any organization that fails to positively respond to change will surely go to extinction. However for successful initiation and implementation of change initiatives, there is need for diligence and skillfulness from the part of organizational leaders especially those from Higher Education Institutions (HEIs). Several studies have confirmed that seventy percent of change initiatives fail and the failure has been largely attributed to leaders’ ineffectiveness in anchoring change programme. Through extensive analysis of findings of several case studies, failure to gradually institutionalize change initiatives and inappropriate leadership styles are found to be part of the reasons why change initiatives fail in Higher Education Institutions (HEIs). This paper therefore discusses change management process and leadership styles. Turning institutions to learnin... International Journal for Research in Applied Science and Engineering Technology This paper aims to explore the role of leadership in organizational change. A leader works as a change agent who can manage organizational process effectively. The changing trends have compelled organizations to constantly review and reevaluate the recent technological advancements and customers' expectations to understand, adopt and implement changes in their business model. Change is today's demand and required to survive. Now days, Organizations better understand the importance of change and prepare themselves to adopt not only the current but also for future trends to get long term success. Different researches show that 70 percent of organizational change fails to acquire their objectives just because of poor leadership style as they play a central role in an organization. So, the process of change demands an effective and highly skilled leadership that are able to perceive the most desirable feature and address the issues in a most appropriate manner. By the analysis of literature and the results of real life case which are considered for this research paper shows, that a leader with its competencies i.e. "Visionary", "democratic" and "transformational" along with "Innovative Approach" can ascertain more effective organizational change with success. As a result, this research proposed a model that obtain from leadership competencies i.e. organizational change, sustainable success and innovation which expresses the relationship between successful organizational change and role of leadership. Loading Preview Sorry, preview is currently unavailable. You can download the paper by clicking the button above. 2005 International Journal of Innovative Research and Development Nursing Informatics. com, 2000 International Journal of Academic Research in Business and Social Sciences, 2021 Journal of Human Resource Management, 2019 International Journal of Pedagogical Innovations, 2016 2014 Global Encyclopedia of Public Administration, Public Policy, and Governance,, 2017 2009 On Leadership In Relation to Change, 2021 2006