Agree & Join LinkedIn By clicking Continue to join or sign in, you agree to LinkedIn’s User Agreement, Privacy Policy, and Cookie Policy. McKinsey’s 7S framework is one of the models for organizational change that preserved its popularity and effectiveness. Robert Waterman and Tom Peters, two consultants working in McKinsey, developed the model in early 1980s. This model can be used as a guide for organizational change; it takes a holistic approach to the organization of the companies. Cellars (2007) asserts that the model can be used as a framework not only for change management but also for comprehending the organization for rational and emotional components. According to McKinsey’s 7S Framework, there are seven internal elements for an organization which should be aligned for success. If the alignment context is useful, organizations can apply the 7S model for: 1. Enhancing the organizational performance 2. Deciding the best way for implementation of the suggested strategy 3. Exploring the possible effects if an organizational change is made in the future 4. Aligning departments during an alliance, acquisition The Seven Elements The 7S Model can be outlined in 7 parts and in 2 categories. These parts are independent. Hence, all of them must be analyzed for successful organizational change. If the managers ignore at least one of them during the change process, missing one factor will result in missing the effect of other factors. Besides, the comparative importance of each factor can change by the time of progress. Definition and identification of "Hard" elements are simpler and executives can affect them directly. Organization charts, formal procedures, IT systems and strategic parts can be given as examples of “Hard” elements. However, “Soft” elements are more complicated to understand. They are more intangible and more affected by culture. It is essential for organization success to take into consideration both “Hard” and “Soft” elements, all the elements are interdependent and affect each other. Elements of the Model 1. Shared Values: They are placed in the center of the model and interrelated with all the factors. Therefore, they depict the culture of the organization. They support long-term achievements and motivate employees to explore new, competitive arenas. Likewise, shared values provide employee engagement with the organization. 2. Strategy: Strategy clarifies how the limited resources of the organization will be distributed to achieve the targets. The distribution of the resources will be planned according to the aim of winning the competition in the market. 3. Structure: The structure describes how the departments and units of the organization are related to each other. 4. Systems: The systems such as procedures, processes, and routines explain the daily activities and responsibilities for works to continue smoothly. Financial systems, recruiting and rewarding systems, information systems can be given as examples. 5. Staff: It shows the number and roles of the employees in the organization. 6. Style: It refers to the organization’s cultural style and the ways how management behaves to be a successful organization. Styles can be different even though the companies belong to the same industry. The difference between Microsoft and Google proves this statement. 7. Skills: They are the competencies of the people in the organization. How to Use the Model The McKinsey’s 7S Framework can be used as a tool to identify the ineffectiveness in the organizations. This model can be benefitted as a guide or blueprint for executives in the organizations to make necessary changes for improvement. It should be noted that changing one of the element will directly or indirectly influence the remaining elements since they are all interconnected to each other as discussed earlier. Therefore, leaders and managers should plan their actions accordingly. The model says that the 7 elements should be aligned together for satisfactory organizational performance. The model provides benefits to identify the required realignments to maintain or improve the performance of the organization. Besides, the framework enables managers to think about the wider impact of changing one element due to its effect on the other elements In 7S Framework, the checklist questions are very important to analyze the situation of the organization. The questions should cover organization’s strategy and how objectives must be achieved, also how to adjust strategy if there are changes in customers’ demands and environmental issues. On the other hand, the checklist questions should also cover the organization’s structure, hierarchy, activities coordination’s, and if decision making centralized or decentralized. Finally, the checklist questions should investigate the systems control and monitoring policy, shared values core and culture, leadership style, staff competencies, skills and their ability to do the job. Model Key Points The McKinsey’s 7S Framework can be used for almost any organizational effectiveness issues. It allows understanding what does not work in the organization by indicating the inconsistency between the elements of the organization. After identifying the nonaligned elements, the managers can work on the consistency of organizational elements to make sure that all the elements contribute the common goals. The process of analyzing where the organization is currently in terms of these elements is worthwhile but by taking such analysis to the next level and determining the ultimate state for each of the factors, organization or team can be moved forward. To view or add a comment, sign in Change management models are helpful in outlining, simplifying and describing the change process so that we can… These days, global change issues are very complicated, and accordingly, the consequences of decisions are usually… If organizations set up a strategic change plan, they will be enabled to have a guideline for how to reach their…