McKinsey’s 7-S Framework was first introduced in the 1970s by business consultants Robert Waterman and Tom Peters in the book In Search of Excellence, who examined the role of coordination in organizational effectiveness. Previous models to this point had focused on organizational structure as the focal point when considering enterprise effectiveness. The framework mapped the intersectionality of seven factors that influence an organization’s ability to adapt and change. It highlighted the interdependence of these factors and that without working on these seven factors in a coordinate way, no single factor would experience improvements. Today, McKinsey’s 7-S Model is a widely used change management model. Organizations use it to assess potential change and monitor its impact on internal operations. In this article, we explore in-depth the critical elements of McKinsey’s 7-S Model, its implementation, and how enterprise organizations have leveraged this model for effective change management. The McKinsey 7-S Model is a change framework based on a company’s organizational design and coordination. It aims to depict how to manage organizational change by strategizing around the interactions of seven key elements: Structure, Strategy, System, Shared Values, Skill, Style, and Staff. The 7-S model highlights that there exists a domino effect when any one element is transformed to restore effective balance. The central placement of shared values emphasizes that a substantial change culture impacts all the other elements to drive change. The McKinsey 7-S Model depicts seven shared values: Structure, Strategy, System, Shared Values, Skill, Style, and Staff. The McKinsey 7-S Framework then categorizes these seven elements into two categories: hard elements and soft elements. Let’s explain each ‘S’ element of the McKinsey 7-S Model in more detail. The strategy element is a detailed plan that organizations create for successful change implementation and to gain a competitive edge. A well-crafted strategy is aligned with the other six elements of the 7-S model and is reinforced by a strong vision, mission, and values. Structure or organizational structure refers to a clear chain of command to avoid chaos & confusion. Structure is a simple yet crucial element as it creates a sense of employee accountability within the organization. Systems refer to the processes and operational procedures employed to complete a business’s routine activities. An organization’s SOPs comprise practices and workflows that directly impact productivity and decision-making. These are the core values governing an organization’s health. While implementing a change, organizations expect a behavioral modification from their employees, which is only possible in a strong change culture and organizational values. This element refers to the management style prevalent in a company that decides the level of employee productivity and satisfaction. This element represents the talent pool required, the size of the existing workforce, and their motivations. It also considers how they are trained and rewarded within the organization. Skills refer to the abilities of employees to complete tasks. A study suggests that 45% of respondents reported that a skill gap caused a loss in productivity. Skills gaps overburden experienced employees who have to pick up the slack for their coworkers’ inexperience. It’s essential to identify the skill gaps and create relevant employee training programs to bridge these gaps. ✓ Thank you, the checklist will be sent to your email Change agents can effectively implement the McKinsey 7-S model using a top-bottom approach. You must identify which elements of the 7-S framework to realign to improve organizational performance or maintain alignment and performance during other changes such as restructuring, process improvement, a corporate merger, new software implementation, or a leadership change. Here are the following action items to consider before applying the 7-S model: Perform a business process analysis to identify gaps and inconsistencies in your organization’s existing business processes. List the unaligned areas and what needs to change to restore the effective balance. This step is research-intensive and requires change leaders to find the sweet spot where management’s vision of an optimal organizational design aligns well with the sentiments of the rest of the team members. After identifying the outliers, change agents must create a detailed implementation plan. The action plan should include required changes to the organization’s hierarchy, communication flow, and reporting relationships, which will allow the company to achieve the desired organizational design. The change implementation stage is the most critical stage of any change initiative, and only well-implemented changes will avoid resistance to change and prevent overall change failures. You should identify internal change agents or hire change consultants best suited to implement your changes. These seven elements are highly dynamic and change constantly. Therefore, practitioners must track these elements and their impact on one another to maintain the momentum of change. Related Resources Studying corporate examples of how they tackle organizational changes based on the 7-S model reveals the practical applications of this model, including both the failure and success of organizational change projects. To understand the interconnectedness of McKinsey’s 7-S Framework, let’s explore McDonald’s as a case study: Its Velocity Growth Strategy focuses on retaining its customers by fortifying its focus on what it does best (breakfast, low prices), regaining lost customers by refocusing on quality and converting customers from other chains to loyal McDonald’s customers by entering new markets and offering new product lines (like coffee and desserts). It also provides its franchises with corporate onboarding, training, and upskilling courses and materials to enable their workforce across locations. Its employee training is provided in various learning formats, from online PDFs, videos, and traditional in-person training. Its franchise model allows it to have a presence in local communities and support what makes the most significant impact across its 14,000 US-based stores. McDonald’s offers a variety of community-based programs and non-profit entities, including its Ronald McDonald House, HACER National Scholarships, Black & Positively Golden program, its manager training programs, and more. McDonald’s also shares its values in how it operates through pledges to source from only renewable, recycled, and certified sources. In 2019, McDonald’s acquired Dynamic Yield, an AI company that focused on ML decision logic and personalization, for $300M. The company is actively using this AI technology to optimize the efficiency of its drive-thru experience and reduce customer wait times. In 2023, McDonald’s partnered with Whatfix to drive the adoption of its custom application, which franchises and owner-operators use to configure and customize their menu items. McDonald’s realized its unique structure required more staff support on the systems that enable its over 8,000 locally owned franchised locations. With Whatfix, McDonald’s enabled owner-operators with in-app guidance on its custom ‘Restaurant File Management’ system to support users on menu tasks like adding new items, activating promotional items, changing the hours of availability, and setting prices. This drove business outcomes by enabling its staff with support in the flow of work to utilize systems properly. The downstream impact improved activations of seasonal menu items that drove revenue, improved marketing ROI by providing customers with season items promised in advertising, and improved owner-operated efficiency by reducing the need for IT support when menu-related issues occurred. McKinsey’s seven elements (Structure, Strategy, Shared Values, Skill, System, Shared Values, Style, and Staff) are highly interconnected. If change leaders fail to create a well-rounded action plan to restore the balance, a company will fail to adapt to changes in its environment. The past decade has experienced an incredible workplace shift from traditional processes and manual systems to integrated systems and the digital workplace. Through digital transformation, organizations are empowered to maximize their efficiency, make data-driven decisions, provide superior customer experiences, and achieve previous unobtainable levels of growth. As McKinsey’s 7-S Framework proposed, transformational change projects will likely fail unless organizations address the impact new digital technologies have across its seven key elements. Technology must be built with these organizational factors in mind. McKinsey’s 7-S Framework for Digital Transformation Explore other popular change management models: Change Clicks Better With Whatfix To drive change adoption and maximize value realization from digital transformation investments, organizations must train and support employees through times of change and enable them with user-friendly technology experiences that work for them. That’s why software clicks better with Whatfix. With Whatfix Mirror, L&D teams and change leaders easily create replicate sandbox application environments of your enterprise applications and tasks to provide interactive, hands-on application training in a risk-free sandbox. Whatfix DAP is a digital adoption platform that provides organizations with a no-code editor to create in-app guidance and support in the flow of work to help employees quickly become familiar with new technologies and adopt new processes. With Whatfix DAP, accelerate new hire time-to-proficiency or drive change adoption with Task Lists and Tours. Flows provide in-app guidance for complex workflows, and Smart Tips help employees through infrequently done tasks. Self Help integrates with your knowledge repositories, helping users find answers to support questions and process-related help easily. With Whatfix Product Analytics, set up custom events to track user behavior, benchmark key user adoption KPIs (like time-to-proficiency, funnel conversion, time-to-completion, etc.), analyze workflows, and identify areas of user friction. Use these insights to create a data-driven, continuous improvement approach to building frictionless business processes and tasks that work for your end-users. Ready to get started? Request a Whatfix demo! Software Clicks Better With Whatfix Thank you for subscribing!