Advanced Search P371 Introduction: The ADKAR model is a widely recognized framework for understanding and managing organizational change. It was developed by Jeff Hiatt in the early 2000s and has been applied to a wide range of industries, including healthcare. The model has applications to the practice of both radiology and nuclear medicine. According to the model, successful organizational change requires individuals to progress through five stages: awareness, desire, knowledge, ability, and reinforcement. Each stage represents a distinct set of factors that influence an individual's ability to successfully adapt to and support organizational change. Methods: In the context of nuclear medicine, the ADKAR model can be used to understand and manage the challenges and opportunities associated with implementing organizational changes, such as adopting new technologies or implementing new policies and procedures. At the awareness stage, individuals must be made aware of the need for change and the potential benefits and consequences of the proposed change. At the desire stage, individuals must have a personal motivation to support the change. At the knowledge stage, individuals must have the necessary skills and knowledge to support the change. At the ability stage, individuals must be able to apply their knowledge and skills in order to successfully implement the change. At the reinforcement stage, ongoing support and reinforcement must be provided to ensure that the change is sustained over the long term. Results: Managing change can have a high rate of failure depending on the implementation. Models of change management such as the ADKAR model can be quite effective in the practice of radiology and nuclear medicine. These models can offer various tools to help the effective management of change. Changes may include strategy, policy and technology, all applicable to the practice of nuclear medicine. These changes may also include various aspects of practice guidelines, insurance, reimbursements and culture of the department. Changes may occur over many years so it is important to create various short term goals. We discuss the utilization of these models to help guide progress within the department. Conclusions: The ADKAR model provides a useful framework for understanding and managing organizational change in nuclear medicine. By understanding the factors that influence an individual's ability to successfully adapt to and support change, organizations can better design and implement change initiatives that are more likely to be successful. Additionally, the model can be used by educators and trainers to design more effective change management programs in nuclear medicine. Thank you for your interest in spreading the word on Journal of Nuclear Medicine. NOTE: We only request your email address so that the person you are recommending the page to knows that you wanted them to see it, and that it is not junk mail. We do not capture any email address. © 2025 SNMMI